<!-- TITLE: Wireless Basics -->
<!-- SUBTITLE: A quick summary of Wirelessbasics -->

# Communications
All communication, whether human or electronic, is half or full duplex and delivered at various levels of complexity. Classic examples might be a full duplex telephone call versus a half-duplex CB Radio conversation, and low complexity Morse code versus a highly complex spoken language.

## Understanding PtMP networks
As an analogy, if you are a public speaker than your going to be doing more talking than listening and you're hoping for an environment with low noise and little or no echo.  Otherwise, you may be spending extra time with repeated questions and answers or simply not be understood.  An access point (AP) is much the same.  An AP’s nightmare is spending all of its time talking to a guy in the back row who keeps asking for parts to be repeated and seems to speak so softly and slowly that the AP can barely hear over all of the echoes.  In RF terms these problems are low modulations (slow speaking) as well as reflection and refraction which is pretty similar to echo or reverberation in the audio world.

In RF communication we talk about duplex which is really splitting the concept of communication into two parts, namely, sending and receiving.  A full duplex system can send while receiving whereas a half duplex can only do one action at a time.    WiFi and many Fixed Wireless solutions are half duplex systems meaning that they spend time talking and listening but not both at the same time.  Full-duplex systems generally separate Rx and Tx by some form of channel or conductor separation.  With full duplex wireless, you will find separate wireless frequency (channels) to achieve full duplex whereas many Fixed Wireless PtMP systems will use a single frequency space but separate the Tx and Rx with timing which is how both humans and WiFi function… speak and listen each in its turn.

When working with outdoor fixed wireless broadband it is helpful to understand and design around some of the complications you may face.  One of these complications is called the [hidden node problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hidden_node_problem) which is an issue arising from some protocol decisions that were made in WiFi.  In order to decide when to talk, WiFi listens for a break in the conversation which is part of how it's MAC ("Media Access Control") protocol works [CSMA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carrier-sense_multiple_access).  This works in most WiFi environments because clients can hear one another but it isn't as effective in Fixed Outdoor environments where clients often cannot hear one another due to directional antennas and physical separation.

In order to effectively deliver outdoor fixed wireless broadband, a variety of manufacturers have developed priority and standards-based solutions to address modulation and timing problems that are evident in wireless networks.  For example Cambium, Radwin, Mimosa, Ubiquity, and MikroTik all have independently developed priority [TDMA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time-division_multiple_access) or Time slot based MAC protocol solutions.

At the writing of this article (May 2018), there isn't a standards-based MAC protocol that is particularly designed for fixed wireless broadband but there is a close option for a standard which is the LTE standard. 4G LTE and soon the upcoming 5G LTE are designed for mobile broadband services which are a close solution.  LTE focuses on mobility with the inclusion of components such as the [EPC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_Architecture_Evolution#EPC_protocol_stack) which helps a device roam between sectors and towers seamlessly but the deep integration of mobility solutions come at a cost which keeps LTE from being perfectly built for fixed broadband.  There is a strong and effective push to bring LTE into the Fixed Wireless world by pioneers like Telrad and BaiCells.  Great forward progress has been made in adopting LTE but it cannot yet outperform the user density and data delivery of the best Fixed Wireless Broadband solutions.

Choosing the right PtMP solution is not only a matter of finding the device that can transmit the most packets per second but also finding the right device that operates on the right frequencies and has a MAC protocol that fits your needs.

